**# Client-Server-Development**

**How do you write programs that are maintainable, readable, and adaptable? Especially consider your work on the CRUD Python module from Project One, which you used to connect the dashboard widgets to the database in Project Two. What were the advantages of working in this way? How else could you use this CRUD Python module in the future?**

Perhaps the two most important steps in creating programs that are maintainable, readable, and adaptable are clear comments and code organization. Comments are a way of a developer quickly and easily figuring out the thought process of an individual and quickly catching up. It is much easier to read a good comment, written in a normal language, than it is to read many lines of code. Organization comes in many forms. An example might be our CRUD module that was used on the project. This separate file for CRUD functions is a way to quickly and concisely make changes to all CRUD functions in one central location. It also makes it easy to re-use the same module for different projects which is a huge advantage in that you do not have to re-write basic CRUD functions repeatedly for each project.

**How do you approach a problem as a computer scientist? Consider how you approached the database or dashboard requirements that Grazioso Salvare requested. How did your approach to this project differ from previous assignments in other courses? What techniques or strategies would you use in the future to create databases to meet other client requests?**

Approaching a problem as a computer scientist should always start with research and planning. You cannot solve a problem effectively if you do not understand it fully. These are the most important steps in the process and involve analyzing the data, interviewing potential users to gather requirements and understand what problem is trying to be solved as well as what a perfect solution may look like. Planning would include any scheduling like Gantt charts and would also include things like pseudocode and wireframe designs to layout a basic structure of whatever you are trying to design. In this case, that would be a dashboard. Effectively finishing these steps makes the development stage so much easier and gives a clear blueprint to follow. Included in development is testing. This was crucial in the development of the dashboard for this project because things very rarely went as expected the first time the program was run. Testing allowed me to catch and correct flaws in the code which resulted in a much more successful final product. A lot of this is the same no matter what project you are trying to complete. Where it differed for me was in the use of new tools and programs. 

**What do computer scientists do, and why does it matter? How would your work on this type of project help a company, like Grazioso Salvare, to do their work better?**

Computer scientists use technology to analyze or manipulate data and create programs to solve real world problems. With technology ever improving and being tied to everything today, computer scientists are extremely important. Technology and smart systems control everything from the climate in our homes to flying space shuttles to space. More and more real world problems are being solved with technology every day which means more and more necessity for computer scientists to develop programs and analyze data. With the increase in technology, old programs are even being replaced with newer programs.
